                       FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                    1




                    Five Decades of Mathematics Education Research



                                    Matthew Inglis

                                Loughborough University



                                      Colin Foster

                                University of Nottingham




Mathematics Education Centre

Loughborough University

Loughborough

Leicestershire, LE11 3TU

United Kingdom

Email: m.j.inglis@lboro.ac.uk
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      2
                                            Abstract

Mathematics educators have been publishing their work in international research journals for

nearly five decades. How has the field developed over this period? We analyzed the full text

of all articles published in Educational Studies in Mathematics and the Journal for Research

in Mathematics Education since their foundation. Using Lakatos’s (1978) notion of a

research programme, we focus on the field’s changing theoretical orientations, and pay

particular attention to the relative prominence of the experimental psychology, constructivist

and sociocultural programmes. We quantitatively assess the extent of the ‘social turn’,

observe that the field is currently experiencing a period of theoretical diversity, and identify

and discuss the ‘experimental cliff’, a period during which experimental investigations

migrated away from mathematics education journals.
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     3
            FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH

       Research on mathematical thinking and learning has a long history, but it is

reasonable to suggest that the field of mathematics education research started a new phase in

1968. It was in this year that Educational Studies in Mathematics (ESM) published its first

issue and, two years later, in 1970, the Journal for Research in Mathematics Education

(JRME) followed suit (Kilpatrick, 1992). Accepting 1968 as a starting date for the modern

research field implies that mathematics educators have been publishing research in

international journals for nearly half a century. How has the field changed during this period?

Our goal in this paper is to answer this question by reporting a study in which we analyzed

the full text of all articles published by ESM and JRME since their foundation. This approach

allowed us to identify the main theories, methods and domains that mathematics education

researchers have focused on over the last five decades, and how their relative prominence has

changed during this period.

       Unsurprisingly, there have been several earlier characterizations of the development

of mathematics education as a research field. For example, Hanna and Sidoli (2002)

celebrated the fiftieth volume of ESM by conducting a statistical analysis of the keywords

assigned to ESM articles in the ERIC bibliometric database. They found that the research

community’s interest in geometry and space had declined since the 1970s, and that its interest

in problem solving peaked during the 1980s. Using internal ESM data used to assign

reviewers to papers, Hanna and Sidoli also established that there had been a growth in the

number of papers that focused on social issues in the teaching and learning of mathematics.

This finding echoed Lerman, Xu and Tsatsaroni’s (2002) more detailed analysis of papers

published during the 1990s. Lerman et al. analyzed a sample of papers published in ESM

from 1990 to 2001 and found a substantial increase in the proportion that used social theories.

In the first half of the decade, social approaches were present in 9% of papers, compared to
                          FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                       4
34% in the second half. Tsatsaroni, Lerman and Xu (2003) later extended this analysis to

papers published in JRME and the Proceedings of the International Group for the Psychology

of Mathematics Education (PME), finding similar results. It was this dataset that led Lerman

(2000) to claim that during the 1990s there had been a “social turn in mathematics education

research” (p. 19). He argued that the decade had seen a shift in focus from the cognitive to

the social: from theories that focus on individuals’ thought processes to “theories that see

meaning, thinking, and reasoning as products of social activity” (p. 23).

          Lerman’s (2000) description of the social turn proved extremely influential. Wagner

(2015) argued that, by giving the social turn a name, Lerman described the phenomenon but

also helped shape it. One sign of Lerman’s influence is that other researchers have adopted

his language to advocate for other changes in the discipline. For instance, Gutiérrez (2013)

suggested that mathematics education should make a ‘sociopolitical turn’ and include a

greater focus on issues of social justice and equity. Importantly, unlike Lerman and the social

turn, Gutiérrez was not claiming that mathematics education research had already gone

through a sociopolitical turn, but rather was adopting Lerman’s language to argue that it

should.

          Despite the significance of Lerman’s characterization of the social turn, some have

questioned whether it continued through the 2000s. For example, based on their personal

impressions of presentations at PME conferences, Gates and Jorgensen (2015) maintained

that the social turn is absent from much of the mathematics education research literature.

Similarly, Jablonka and Bergsten (2010) hypothesized that the trend Lerman identified may

not have continued beyond the period he studied. Quantitatively assessing the extent of the

social turn is one goal of the study reported in this paper.

          Alongside Lerman et al.’s (2002) and Hanna and Sidoli’s (2002) contributions there

have been numerous other attempts to empirically map shifts in mathematics education
                           FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                        5
research (e.g., Sierpinska & Kilpatrick, 1998). Largely these have focused on particular

topics, such as gender, class and race (Chassapis, 2002; Lubienski & Bowen, 2000),

particular theories (e.g., Pais & Valero, 2012), or particular geographical regions (e.g., Boero

& Szendrei, 1998; Lai & Loo, 1992; Schoenfeld, 2016). These papers have typically analyzed

database keywords (e.g., Chassapis, 2002; Lubienski & Bowen, 2000), reported interviews

with leading researchers (e.g., Kieran, 1994), given personal introspective accounts of their

impressions of changes in the field (e.g., Wilson, 1994), or offered historical accounts (e.g.,

Kilpatrick, 1992, 2014).

       Here we offer a broader analysis of changes in mathematics education research over

the past five decades. Rather than focusing on particular topics, time periods or geographical

areas, we analyzed the full text of all articles published in ESM and JRME since their

inception five decades ago. Using this inclusive approach, we were able to identify the key

topics that mathematics education researchers have focused on since 1968, and track how

these have changed over time. Before presenting our method and results, we first situate our

work using Lakatos’s (1978) methodology of scientific research programmes.



            Theory Change: The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes

       How do academic disciplines make progress? Philosophers of science have proposed

a variety of accounts, including Popper’s (1959) theory of progress through falsification, and

Kuhn’s (1962) suggestion that progress occurs through periods of normal science being

punctuated by rapid paradigm shifts. Here we situate our work theoretically using Lakatos’s

(1978) notion of a scientific research programme1, which can be seen as a modification of

Kuhn’s account (Larvor, 1998). Whereas Kuhn felt that different research approaches –



       1
        As is traditional when discussing Lakatos’s work, we use the British spelling of
‘programme’.
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      6
paradigms, in his language – were incommensurate, Lakatos argued that this implied that

there are no rational methods by which one can choose between different paradigms, and

therefore that scientific progress was “a matter for mob psychology” (p. 91). He saw his

methodology of scientific research programmes as being a means by which to maintain

Popper’s belief that science is a rational process, while retaining Kuhn’s much greater fidelity

to history (Larvor, 1998).

       The main idea in Lakatos’s (1978) account is that the base descriptive unit of research

is not, as Popper (1959) argued, an individual research hypothesis, or even an individual

theory, but rather a research programme. Such a programme is, in Lakatos’s sense, a

historically connected series of theories that all share the same ‘hard core’; a collection of key

assumptions and beliefs accepted by those who work within the programme. For instance, the

hard core of the Newtonian research programme included the notion of gravitational action at

a distance, together with Newton’s laws of motion. The hard core is the programme’s

defining characteristic: it must be defended against falsification, since if the hard core were to

be modified the programme itself would have been abandoned.

       Research programmes often encounter difficulties in the form of anomalous empirical

observations. Indeed, Lakatos (1978) said that programmes “grow in a permanent ocean of

anomalies” (p. 6). He proposed that they deal with these in one of two ways. Often,

anomalies are simply ignored: if the programme is successfully achieving its goals,

researchers may simply treat anomalies as open questions to be dealt with later. Alternatively,

the programme may use what Lakatos called a ‘protective belt’. This consists of a large

collection of auxiliary hypotheses that supplement the hard core, and which can be used to

prevent it being falsified. The protective belt, unlike the hard core, can be modified or

abandoned without doing serious damage to the programme. When some empirical anomaly

– a potential challenge to the programme’s hard core – is observed, a modification is made to
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      7
the protective belt. This allows the hard core to survive intact, and the programme to

continue. To illustrate this idea, Lakatos gave the example of a scientist observing a planet

moving in a fashion inconsistent with Newton’s laws. Rather than abandoning the hard core

of the Newtonian research programme, the scientist would examine hypotheses from the

protective belt, perhaps by changing his or her assumptions about atmospheric refraction, or

even by proposing an as-yet-unobserved planet (Linton, 2004). What the scientist certainly

would not do is abandon their beliefs in the hard core.

       The third component of a research programme is its ‘heuristic’, the collection of

methods and problem-solving techniques which researchers within the programme use to

make progress. For instance, the Newtonian research programme’s heuristic involved

modeling empirical observations and making predictions using a set of sophisticated

mathematical techniques. The heuristic is tied to the programme, and it is not always

straightforward to separate a programme’s hard core from its heuristic. Indeed, Lakatos

(1978, p. 181) suggested that this distinction could in some cases merely be “a matter of

convention”. For example, the measurement of response times is an important part of the

heuristic of the cognitive psychology research programme, but this is because of assumptions

from the programme’s hard core (the temporal nature of information processing).

       Using the notions of the hard core, protective belt and heuristic, Lakatos (1978)

attempted to explain scientific progress and theory change by considering a discipline as a

collection of competing programmes. He distinguished between two types of research

programme. ‘Progressing’ programmes are those that regularly generate surprising new

results and research directions. Such programmes may be so successful that they can

legitimately ignore anomalies, or they may deal with them by modifying their protective belts

in such a way that their heuristics are able to use the modifications to productively generate

more new results. In contrast, a ‘degenerating’ programme rarely makes novel discoveries or
                          FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                       8
predictions, and dedicates its protective belt to the post hoc accommodation of anomalous

observations. Lakatos suggested that research programmes are abandoned when researchers

give up trying to accommodate anomalies into a degenerating research programme, and

instead join a rival programme that is progressing.

         In our discussion, we talk, as did Lakatos, about ‘science’ and ‘scientific’ research

programmes. However, it is clear that Lakatos intended his ideas to apply to disciplines

beyond the hard sciences. Indeed, he used his account to analyze the weaknesses of both

Marxism and Freudianism (Lakatos, 1978), and others have applied his ideas to educational

and psychological research (e.g., Dienes, 2008; Gilbert & Swift, 1985; Inglis, 2015; Taber,

2007).

         Research programmes can be considered at different levels. Indeed Lakatos (1978)

pointed out that science as a whole could be seen as a huge research programme, “with

Popper’s supreme heuristic rule: ‘devise conjectures which have more empirical content than

their predecessors’” (Lakatos, 1978, p. 47). However, more normally, an academic discipline

can be seen as consisting of several rival research programmes that compete for researchers’

attention by attempting to demonstrate that they are progressing (Gillies, 2007; Larvor,

1998). It is this latter use to which we put Lakatos’s notion in this paper. Although Lakatos

emphasized the role of competition between theories, he intended this to be a constructive

form of competition, where each programme is spurred to progress as a result of challenges

from rival programmes. Indeed, Lakatos even advocated that, if possible, individual

researchers should work within more than one research programme in order to expedite this

process (Lakatos, 1978, p. 112).

         Lakatos (1978) argued for the accuracy of his way of thinking about scientific

progress by analyzing episodes from history (e.g., Niels Bohr’s work on light emission). His

method was to produce what he called ‘rational reconstructions’ of how ideas developed,
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      9
with historical details and the biographies of those involved relegated to footnotes (Larvor,

1998). The aim of such a reconstruction is to provide “a rational explanation of the growth of

objective knowledge”, not to offer a detailed historical account (Lakatos, 1970, p. 91). We

note that some aspects of Lakatos’s methodology of scientific research programmes have

been criticized, primarily by Feyerabend (1981, 1993), and towards the end of the paper we

argue that these criticisms are not relevant to our use of Lakatos’s work.

       Our goal in the next section is to demonstrate that Lakatos’s ideas provide a helpful

structure within which to understand the development of mathematics education research. To

this end, we offer a rational reconstruction of the ‘social turn’ identified by Lerman (2000).



           The ‘Social Turn’ in Mathematics Education: A Rational Reconstruction

       Our goal in this section is to offer a sketch of how existing accounts of the social turn

in mathematics education research (e.g., Clements & Ellerton, 1996; Lerman, 2000; Lerman,

Xu & Tsatsaroni, 2002; Mousley, 2015; Sakonidis, 2015) can be reinterpreted in terms of

Lakatos’s (1978) methodology of scientific research programmes. To this end, we offer a

brief rational reconstruction of the social turn. We begin in the 1980s, a period during which

constructivism was the dominant research programme in mathematics education. We first

describe its hard core, heuristic and protective belt.

       The constructivist research programme in mathematics education developed out of

Piaget’s (1952) work on child development. Key assumptions that made up the hard core

were that knowledge construction is an individual process, designed to maximize one’s

ability to make sense of the world. Individuals receive sensory input, filter it and then

actively organize it into mental schemas. Learning takes place when learners construct new

knowledge by creating new, or reorganizing existing, schemas. Knowledge is not passively
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      10
received; it is actively created by the individual (e.g., Cobb, Yackel & Wood, 1988;

Glasersfeld, 1990; Noddings, 1990; Thompson, 2015).

       The constructivist heuristic also originated in Piaget’s (1952) work. It emphasized

careful study of how students make sense of new mathematical ideas, typically using clinical

interviews where participants were asked to orally reflect on their thought processes (e.g.,

Ginsburg, 1981; Swanson, Schwartz, Ginsburg, & Rossan, 1981). As befitted the

programme’s emphasis on individuals’ constructions of personal schemas, clinical interviews

were almost always conducted with a single participant, who was typically observed making

sense of a previously unseen open-ended mathematical task.

       Various flavors of constructivism were developed, including Glasersfeld’s (1990)

brand of radical constructivism. Radical constructivists were comfortable with the

programme’s hard core, and its focus on individual sense making, but went further by

emphasizing that the goal of constructing schemas is merely to organize the individual’s

experience of the world, and not to discover an objective external reality (e.g. Glasersfeld,

1991). One way of interpreting these additional assumptions of radical constructivism is to

see them as part of constructivism’s protective belt. By adopting the radical position

advocated by Glasersfeld, a constructivist mathematics educator could avoid conflicts with

the new fallibilist philosophies of mathematics that had been interpreted as denying the

existence of objective mathematical knowledge (e.g., Davis & Hersh, 1980; Kitcher, 1983;

Lakatos, 1976). However, the radical perspective was not part of the constructivist hard core.

One could be what Glasersfeld (1990) called a ‘trivial constructivist’ and still happily endorse

the constructivist hard core and heuristic.

       By the end of the 1980s, the radical version of the constructivist research programme

was dominant in mathematics education (Davis, 1990), but its emphasis on individual

knowledge construction had difficulty in accounting for several findings that seemed to
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     11
suggest that learning had an important social component. For example, Lave (1988) found

that adults’ arithmetic strategies seemed to be contingent upon the social setting in which

they were performed. She found that while adults appeared to make few arithmetic errors

when shopping for groceries, they performed relatively poorly on paper-and-pencil tests of

arithmetic (but see Greiffenhagen & Sharrock, 2008). Similarly, Carraher (1988) found that

children performed quite differently when conducting mathematics in school and ‘in the

street’. Further evidence that mathematical thinking was contingent upon social factors came

from Walkerdine’s (1988, 1989) finding that negative attitudes towards, and lower attainment

in, mathematics seemed to be more common in socially disadvantaged children and girls.

These, and other similar, observations can be seen as a challenging anomaly to the

constructivist research programme. How could the programme, whose hard core and heuristic

emphasized individual activity, deal with research findings that appeared to show that

mathematical thinking and learning could not be fully understood without considering social

contexts?

       The notion of social constructivism (Ernest, 1991), which, following Vygotsky

(1978), emphasized the role of social settings, history and culture in forming individual

knowledge, can be seen as a rescue hypothesis that was added to constructivism’s protective

belt to defend the programme against anomalies of the sort reported by Lave (1988), Carraher

(1988) and Walkerdine (1988, 1989). Indeed, Mousley (2015) described social

constructivism as “a compromise position” designed to explain “how the notion of individual

cognition could remain viable in the context of social group interaction” (pp. 154-155).

Although the role of social interaction in learning was emphasized by social constructivists,

using constructs such as taken-as-shared knowledge, the construction of knowledge was still

a fundamentally individual pursuit. The constructivist hard core remained.
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      12
       As discussed earlier, Lakatos (1978) saw the addition of rescue hypotheses as being a

route through which we are able to judge whether a programme is progressing or

degenerating. What did the social constructivist rescue hypothesis reveal about the

constructivist programme? Opinions differed. Drawing on wider debates within the social

sciences (for a review see, e.g., Bruner, 1996), Lerman (1996) argued that it created an

internal contradiction. In Lakatos’s terms, he was suggesting that constructivism was a

degenerating programme. His point was simple. If knowledge was constructed by individuals

through an idiosyncratic internal process, how could knowledge become shared – and known

to be shared – within social groups? In other words, how could constructivism, with its focus

on individual knowledge, explain intersubjectivity? He directly critiqued the social

constructivist rescue hypothesis: “I suggest that the extension of radical constructivism

toward a social constructivism, in an attempt to incorporate intersubjectivity, leads to an

incoherent theory of learning” (p. 133). Lerman was arguing that the rescue hypothesis was

incompatible with the constructivist hard core, and that the research programme was

degenerating to such an extent that it should be discarded: “mathematics education would

benefit from abandoning constructivism as a view of how people learn” (p. 133).

       As well as arguing that the constructivist programme should be abandoned, Lerman

(1996) also discussed the research programme he felt should replace it. While

constructivism’s hard core emphasized that knowledge is constructed by individuals, the

sociocultural research programme supported by Lerman instead had a hard core which

assumed that thinking, reasoning and knowledge were all products of social activity.

Vygotsky (1986) characterized the distinction:

       “In our conception, the true direction of the development of thinking is not from the

       individual to the socialised but from the social to the individual” (Vygotsky, 1986,

       p. 32).
                          FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                       13
Clearly, this difference in the hard core also led to a substantially different heuristic. If

thinking is constituted in social interactions, then the individual clinical interview is not

likely to be a suitable way to study thinking. Instead, the sociocultural research programme’s

heuristic included a much greater emphasis on observations of classroom discourse (e.g.,

Goos, Galbraith & Renshaw, 2002).

         As Lakatos would have predicted, Lerman’s (1996) argument was rejected by those

who wished to defend the constructivist research programme (e.g., Steffe & Thompson,

2000), and they continued to conduct and publish constructivist research that was widely read

(e.g., Steffe & Ulrich, 2014; Thompson, 2014). However, when Lerman (2000) claimed there

had been “a social turn in mathematics education research”, he was asserting that the

sociocultural research programme was growing – in terms of the number of researchers and

its influence – at the expense of the constructivist research programme. As discussed above,

Lerman based this claim on analyzing a sample of research papers from the 1990s (Lerman et

al., 2002). The extent to which the social turn continued through the 2000s is a matter of

discussion (e.g., Gates & Jorgensen, 2015; Jablonka & Bergsten, 2010).



                                  Topic Modeling as a Method

         The social turn is an example of theory change where a research programme was

apparently abandoned by a subset of its followers. However Lakatos’s notion of a research

programme indicates that there are other ways in which programmes can develop. For

instance, their domain of applicability might shift (the content being studied could change),

or they might modify their heuristic (the main methods that they use could develop). To fully

understand how the discipline of mathematics education has changed since ESM and JRME

began publishing, we require a method that allows developments in the hard core, heuristic

and domain content to be identified. In this section, we introduce topic modeling, a method
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      14
that allows such developments to be identified through the analysis of the language used in

research papers.

       The rationale for our use of a linguistic approach is that a research programme’s hard

core, its heuristic, and the domain content it is used to analyze, all have characteristic

linguistic features. For instance, we would expect a research paper that reports a

constructivist analysis of geometry learning to contain words such as ‘triangle’, ‘circle’,

‘angle’, but also ‘schema’, ‘constructivism’ and ‘interaction’.

       Topic modeling is a computational method designed to summarize large collections of

texts by a small number of conceptually connected topics or themes (Blei, Ng, & Jordan,

2003; Grimmer & Stewart, 2013). The aim is to discover the main themes that are present in

a large unstructured collection of documents by analyzing the patterns with which words co-

occur. One way of understanding topic modeling is to imagine how documents could be

created from a pre-existing set of topics. A topic is defined by a probability distribution over

words. So, in one topic the word ‘angle’ would have a high weighting, and in another it

would have a low weighting, and similarly for ‘schema’, ‘triangle’, and so on. We can

imagine creating a document by selecting a distribution over topics. For instance, a given

document might be composed of 40% of words from Topic 1, 15% from Topic 2, 0% from

Topic 3, and so on. Given this set up, documents of a given length can be created simply by

selecting words from the topics with the appropriate frequency. For instance, every time a

word is selected for our document there would be a 40% chance of it coming from Topic 1,

and within Topic 1 there would be some chance of it being ‘angle’, some chance of it being

‘triangle’, and so on. This method uses the so-called ‘bag of words’ model of text, which

dramatically simplifies language by ignoring both word order and ‘stop words’ (words such

as ‘the’ and ‘a’ that are topic independent).
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      15
       Topic modeling can be thought of as carrying out this text construction process in

reverse. The method starts with the documents, assumes that they were constructed via this

process, and identifies which topics would be most likely to have produced them. Topic

modeling is a computationally demanding task that relies upon latent Dirichlet allocation

algorithms that identify the topics that best fit the documents (Blei et al., 2003). The method

is somewhat analogous to a quantitative version of grounded theory; there are no

preconceived ideas about the topics that will emerge, and individual words are tagged with

codes that identify the topics with which they are associated. Once the modeling process has

occurred, we can study the composition of each document. For instance, we may discover

that Document 10 is made up of 4% of Topic 1, 60% of Topic 2, and so on.

       One difficulty with the topic modeling approach is that one must specify in advance

the number of topics the algorithm should find. By so doing, the researcher can determine the

granularity of the analysis. One method to decide upon a suitable number of topics is to

assess how well the topic model fits the texts, using a measure known as perplexity. The

lower the perplexity of a model with a given number of topics, the better the model’s fit (Blei

et al., 2003). Perplexity is calculated by fitting a topic model to a subset of the texts and then

assessing its fit on the remaining texts. This process is repeated for models with different

numbers of topics. It is always possible to reduce the perplexity of a topic model by

increasing the number of topics, but at some point the gain in fit will be offset by the

increased difficulty of interpreting the larger number of topics. Jacobi, van Atteveldt and

Welbers (2016) proposed that the number of topics to retain should be assessed using a

method analogous to Cattell’s (1966) scree test in the context of factor analyses. By

calculating the perplexity of models with different numbers of topics, one can assess if there

is a point at which the reduction in perplexity appears to ‘level off’. But Jacobi et al.
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      16
emphasized that, as with factor analyses, one major criterion for selecting the number of

topics when producing a topic model is the interpretability of the resulting topics.

       The topic modeling approach has several advantages over traditional approaches to

studying a field’s historical development. First, the approach is extremely inclusive. It would

be unrealistic for a researcher to read and analyze every ESM and JRME paper ever

published, but the topic modeling approach can take account of this number of texts,

implying that important historical trends are unlikely to be missed. Second, the approach is

relatively neutral; because the analysis is conducted algorithmically, it does not prioritize one

historical trend over another. However, this neutrality comes at a cost. The results of our

analysis are purely descriptive; the topic modeling method identifies phenomena which must

then be interpreted, a task we attempt later in the paper. Naturally, these interpretations are

more subjective and open to criticism than the topic modeling analysis itself.



                                     Identifying the Topics

       In the nearly five decades since the first issues of ESM and JRME, the two journals

have established themselves as the leading international venues for research in mathematics

education. Indeed in 2012 a project by the European Mathematics Society and the European

Society for Research in Mathematics found that ESM and JRME were the only two journals

given the highest possible quality rating by at least two-thirds of the expert mathematics

educators sampled (Toerner & Arzarello, 2012). Consistent findings were reported by Nivens

and Otten (2017) and Williams and Leatham (2017). We therefore focused our analysis on

ESM and JRME, but highlight that this does restrict our conclusions to English-language

mathematics education research.

       We downloaded every ‘article’ published between 1968 and 2015 by ESM and JRME

from the journals’ websites. These ‘articles’ included everything published within the
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     17
journals and stored as pdfs on the websites, including research papers, editorials, book

reviews, calls for papers, and so on. These pdf files were converted to plain text using

ABBYY FineReader OCR Pro (version 12.1.4), and ‘non-content’, such as copyright

statements or watermarks, were removed. Our final dataset consisted of 1933 files (9.49m

words) from JRME and 2062 files (14.48m words) from ESM.

       We used MALLET (version 2.0.8RC2), a UNIX command-line topic modeling tool

(McCallum, 2002), to calculate possible topic models. We first removed all the ‘stop words’

– very common English words, such as ‘the’, ‘is’, and ‘a’, that would not be topic specific –

on MALLET’s default list. Inspection of the perplexity graph (discussed above), shown in

Figure 1, suggested that 35 topics seemed to be a reasonable choice, and an inspection of the

topic models generated by different numbers of topics suggested that the overall message

from the data did not seem to be sensitive to varying the number of topics slightly.




 Figure 1: The perplexity of topic models with varying numbers of topics. The dashed lines

                   show our interpretation of where the graph ‘levels off’.



       We interpreted each topic that the algorithm identified using two different

approaches. We first studied the words that were highly characteristic of each topic (in the

sense that, when a word from this topic was inserted into a new document during our

counterfactual document creation process, these highly characteristic words had a high
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      18
probability of being selected). For instance, the words with the highest probabilities in the

first topic identified by the algorithm were ‘proof’, ‘proofs’, ‘mathematics’, ‘mathematical’,

‘reasoning’, ‘argument’, ‘students’, ‘arguments’, ‘statement’, ‘deductive’ and ‘proving’.

From this it seemed clear that this topic is concerned with proof and argumentation, and we

gave it the name ‘proof and argumentation’. Second, for each topic, we studied those papers

which had particularly high proportions of included words. For instance, the paper with the

highest proportion of words from the ‘proof and argumentation’ topic (64%, excluding stop

words) was Weber's (2008) article about how mathematicians validate proofs. By studying

these papers, we were able to further understand the nature of the topics, which contributed to

our choice of names.

       Some of the topics were not related to the content of research. For instance, four

topics were concerned with journal administration (announcements of special issues, advice

to prospective authors, lists of editorial board members and so on), and another three

consisted of non-English words (ESM has published articles in both French and German).

Clearly, articles written in French tend to have more linguistic similarity to each other than to

those written in English, regardless of their academic content. We do not discuss these topics

further, though note that it would be worthwhile to establish whether similar topics emerge

from an analogous study of non-English language mathematics education research.

       The remaining 28 topics were assigned names based on their defining words and the

nature of the papers that had particularly high proportions of words from them. The topic

names, together with each topic’s characteristic words and the paper with the highest

proportion of words from each topic, are shown in Table 1. To enable readers to better

understand these 28 topics, we have listed the 10 papers with the highest proportions of

words from each topic in a spreadsheet available at

https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.4877429.
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     19

Topic name                                                         Paper with the highest
(ordered          Characteristic words (top 20)                    proportion of words from
alphabetically)                                                    the topic
                  children number children's addition counting
                                                                   The development of counting
Addition and      subtraction strategies child numbers strategy
                                                                   strategies for single-digit addition
subtraction       arithmetic problems mental task count facts
                                                                   (Baroody, 1987)
                  instruction development tasks ten
                  function concept limit definition calculus       An empirical study of students’
                  numbers number students negative infinite        understanding of a logical structure in
Analysis
                  sequence mathematical infinity image formal      the definition of limit via the ε-strip
                  process functions derivative point points        activity (Roh, 2010)
                  mathematics learning mathematical
                  knowledge development cognitive theory           Interaction or intersubjectivity? A
Constructivism    education activity research process              reply to Lerman (Steffe & Thompson,
                  understanding processes social individual        2000)
                  press concepts view conceptual construction
                                                                   The impact of prior mathematics
                                                                   achievement on the relationship
                  mathematics curriculum school achievement
Curriculum                                                         between high school mathematics
                  students teachers student national textbooks
(especially                                                        curricula and postsecondary
                  standards grade high assessment schools
Reform)                                                            mathematics performance, course-
                  content level curricula reform data textbook
                                                                   taking, and persistence (Post et al.,
                                                                   2010)
                  mathematical knowledge students teacher
                                                                   Introduction teaching situations as
                  theoretical activity process teaching analysis
Didactical                                                         object of research: Empirical studies
                  research mathematics situations situation
theories                                                           within theoretical perspectives
                  didactic didactical classroom springer case
                                                                   (Laborde & Perrin-Glorian, 2005)
                  learning context
Discussions,      question time make fact point part questions
reflections and   process made problem case view important         Letter to the editor (Roberts, 2001)
essays            kind work sense situation answer find paper
                  geometry visual figure spatial triangle angle
Dynamic                                                            Facility with plane shapes: A
                  geometric angles task logo diagram
geometry and                                                       multifaceted skill (Warren & English,
                  diagrams properties shapes triangles shape
visualization                                                      1995)
                  level van sides tasks
                  mathematics education school american
                  cultural countries students social chinese
                                                                   Attention deficit disorder? (Silver,
Equity            schools culture teachers african equity
                                                                   2003)
                  children educational ethnomathematics
                  country japanese parents
                  geometry line point points figure circle plane
Euclidean         lines geometrical angle triangle space
                                                                   Inversive geometry (Coxeter, 1971)
geometry          straight parallel geometric fig figures
                  theorem segment Euclidean
                                                                   Interactions between structure-of-
                  test study group scores research items table     intellect factors and two methods of
Experimental      mathematics tests significant results groups     presenting concepts of modulus seven
designs           variables analysis treatment ability             arithmetic: A follow-up and
                  performance item journal experimental            refinement study (Behr & Eastman,
                                                                   1975)
                  set concept number numbers elements
                                                                   Checker games in operational
                  concepts structure sets group order
                                                                   systems as media for an inductive
Formal analyses   operations examples model operation
                                                                   approach to teaching algebra (Steiner
                  relation system properties element relations
                                                                   & Kaufman, 1969)
                  objects
                                                                   Gender differences in a psychological
                  mathematics differences achievement girls
Gender                                                             model of mathematics achievement
                  gender boys anxiety attitudes sex school
                                                                   (Ethington, 1992)
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      20
                   performance study research high females
                   ability educational factors motivation males
                   mathematics mathematical education book
                                                                   The epos of Euclidean geometry in
                   teaching history chapter mathematicians
History and                                                        Greek secondary education (1836-
                   science university theory problems school
obituaries                                                         1985): Pressure for change and
                   historical geometry ideas curriculum
                                                                   resistance (Toumasis, 1990)
                   educational development work
                   pupils mathematics school teaching learning     Change in mathematics education
Mathematics
                   schools year work level education secondary     since the late 1950’s – Ideas and
education around
                   teachers teacher mathematical project pupil     realisation West Indies (Wilson,
the world
                   years primary children educational              1978)
                   language mathematics english text reading
                   writing mathematical word words texts
Multilingual                                                       Using two languages when learning
                   linguistic languages learners bilingual
learners                                                           mathematics (Moschkovich, 2007)
                   learning written discourse meaning
                   classrooms read
                   tasks task assessment mathematical students
                   mathematics modelling knowledge model
                                                                   Modes of modelling assessment – A
Novel assessment   cognitive competence results models level
                                                                   literature review (Frejd, 2013)
                   solutions quality performance springer
                   information study
                   teacher classroom mathematical discourse
                                                                   Mathematical micro-identities:
Observations of    interaction discussion analysis episode
                                                                   Moment-to-moment positioning and
classroom          activity class learning interactions group
                                                                   learning in a fourth-grade classroom
discussion         social ideas talk work participation thinking
                                                                   (Wood, 2013)
                   it's
                   problem problems solving solution solve
                   mathematical problem-solving strategies         Recall of mathematical problem
Problem solving    word solutions information model strategy       information: Solving related
                   solved processes structure study process        problems (Silver, 1981)
                   table correct
                   proof proofs mathematics mathematical
                   reasoning argument students arguments           How mathematicians determine if an
Proof and
                   statement deductive proving examples            argument is a valid proof (Weber,
argumentation
                   number true mathematicians theorem              2008)
                   statements prove logical argumentation
                   correct items errors reasoning item responses   The development of proportional
Quantitative
                   answer number table subjects answers            reasoning and the ratio concept Part I
assessment of
                   proportional grade incorrect ratio intuitive    – Differentiation of stages (Noelting,
reasoning
                   numbers error response type                     1980)
                   fractions number fraction division numbers
                   unit multiplication rational parts decimal
                                                                   Michael’s fraction schemes (Saenz-
Rational numbers   units knowledge understanding fractional
                                                                   Ludlow, 1994)
                   pieces operations partitioning part scheme
                   multiplicative
                   algebra algebraic equation function
                   equations functions graph students graphs       Evolution of a teaching approach for
School algebra     expressions representations expression          beginning algebra (Banerjee &
                   computer variable arithmetic linear symbolic    Subramaniam, 2012)
                   values understanding representation
                                                                   Grounded blends and mathematical
                   mathematical objects semiotic gestures signs
Semiotics and                                                      gesture spaces: developing
                   meaning object sign gesture fig language
embodied                                                           mathematical understandings via
                   mathematics radford activity springer hand
cognition                                                          gestures (Yoon, Thomas & Dreyfus,
                   space line body metaphor
                                                                   2011)
                   mathematics education social school
                   practices practice work mathematical
Sociocultural                                                      Symbolising the real in mathematics
                   knowledge research identity cultural activity
theory                                                             education (Pais, 2015)
                   power learning context discourse people
                   theory everyday
                           FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                        21
                     length area unit figure reasoning units rate     Fifth graders’ enumeration of cubes
                     number measurement pattern height change         in 3D arrays: Conceptual progress in
 Spatial reasoning
                     time measure relationship quantities cubes       an inquiry-based classroom (Battista,
                     volume generalization distance                   1999)
                     probability data sample statistics statistical
                                                                      A framework for assessing and
                     reasoning chance average sampling
 Statistics and                                                       nurturing young children’s thinking
                     distribution dice thinking outcomes
 probability                                                          in probability (Jones, Langrall,
                     responses grade level probabilistic variation
                                                                      Thornton & Mogill, 1997)
                     events population
                     teachers teacher mathematics teaching
 Teachers’           knowledge beliefs lesson classroom learning      Preservice teachers’ sources of
 knowledge and       content practice mathematical education          decisions in teaching secondary
 beliefs             professional student thinking lessons school     mathematics (Bush, 1986)
                     preservice instruction
                     students student class group mathematics
                                                                      Teacher benefits from using
 Teaching            school time study questions groups work
                                                                      impromptu writing prompts in
 approaches          level classes year problems asked learning
                                                                      algebra classes (Miller, 1992)
                     instruction high activities
           Table 1: The 28 topics, each with the words that best characterize them (in order of

                  probability) and the paper with the highest proportion of words.



         We make several remarks about Table 1. First, readers will have noticed that some

words define more than one topic (for example ‘group’). This highlights one advantage of

topic modeling. If the word ‘group’ appears near to the words ‘set’, ‘elements’, and

‘operation’, it is likely to have a different meaning from if it appears near to the words

‘treatment’, ‘experimental’, ‘pretest’ and ‘posttest’.

         Second, although it was straightforward to identify most of the topics by studying

their characteristic words and most representative papers, in other cases this was not clear.

Here, we briefly justify our characterizations for those topics where this may not be obvious.

         Papers made up of particularly high proportions of words from the ‘teaching

approaches’ topic typically reported discussions or evaluations of particular classroom

teaching strategies. For example, Leikin and Zaslavsky’s (1997) investigation of student

interactions in small-group settings had a high proportion of words from this topic, as did

Brookhart, Andolina, Zuza and Furman’s (2004) discussion of student self-assessment.

         The common theme among papers that had high proportions of words from the

‘didactical theories’ topic was that they used or discussed theories from the continental
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      22
European tradition, such as Chevallard’s (1999) anthropological theory of didactics (ATD) or

Brousseau’s (2006) theory of didactical situations (TDS). For instance, Barbe, Bosch,

Espinoza and Gascon’s (2005) analysis, using ATD, of the teaching of functions in Spanish

high schools, had a high proportion of words from this topic. As would be expected, as well

as having many words from the ‘didactical theories’ topic, this paper also had a high

proportion from the analysis topic.

       Papers that had high proportions of words from the ‘experimental designs’ topic

typically used experimental designs, with random allocation of participants to conditions. Of

the 10 papers with the highest proportions of words from this topic, nine used random

allocation at the participant level to investigate a variety of different research questions.

       Papers that had high proportions of words from the ‘quantitative assessment of

reasoning’ topic typically used large samples to document reasoning behavior. The majority

of the 10 papers with the highest proportions of words from this topic investigated aspects of

proportional reasoning, but there was also a survey of responses to the Wason selection task

(Adi, Karplus & Lawson, 1980) and an investigation of adults’ reasoning about natural

numbers (Vamvakoussi, Van Dooren, & Verschaffel, 2013).

       All the papers with high proportions of words from the ‘sociocultural theory’ topic

used social theories to analyze aspects of mathematics learning. Indeed, two of the papers

with the highest proportions from this topic were from a special issue entitled “Social theory

and research in mathematics education” (Morgan, 2014; Pais & Valero, 2014).

       Of the 10 papers with the highest proportion of words from the ‘constructivism’ topic,

seven were authored by Cobb or Steffe (e.g., Cobb, Yackel & Wood, 1992; Steffe & Kieren,

1994), and the remaining papers either used, discussed or critiqued constructivist approaches

to mathematics education.
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      23
       Papers with high numbers of words from the ‘formal analyses’ topic consisted of

attempts to provide formal mathematical analyses of educational tasks or theories. For

instance, Wittmann’s (1973) attempt to provide an algebraic model of an aspect of Piagetian

theory had a large proportion of words from this topic.

       Finally, there was a topic – ‘discussions, reflections and essays’ – that seemed to

represent reflective, non-empirical discussions of various issues. Papers that had high

proportions of words from this topic often discussed meta-level research issues. Examples

included letters to the editor, a discussion of citation practices in mathematics education

(Leatham, 2015) and various editorials (e.g., Williams, 2007).

       Finally, we attempted to verify that our interpretations of the topics were reasonable

by studying the linear combinations of ‘topic proportions’ for particularly highly cited papers

from each journal. For instance, our topic model suggested that Tall and Vinner’s (1981)

paper on students’ concept images of limits and continuity was mostly made up of the

‘analysis’ topic (which provided 54% of the paper’s words2) and the ‘discussions, reflections

and essays’ topic (24% of the paper’s words). Similarly, the model suggested that Yackel &

Cobb’s (1996) paper that introduced the notion of sociomathematical norms was largely

made up of the ‘observations of classroom discussion’ (42%) and ‘constructivism’ (27%)

topics. Both of these results seemed consistent with the content of the respective papers.




       2
           For the remainder of the paper, when we cite the percentage or proportion of words
from a particular topic, we are excluding stop words (particularly common words such as
‘the’, ‘it’, ‘a’, etc.) from the denominator.
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      24
                                      Changes Over Time

       To look at how the prominence of each topic has changed over time, we used the

linear combinations of topic proportions to calculate the mean proportion of words from each

topic published by each journal in each year. For example, we took the proportion of words

from the ‘proof and argumentation’ topic in every paper published by ESM in 2015, and

calculated the mean. This revealed that, normalized by paper length, 2.7% of the words

published in ESM in 2015 were related to proof and argumentation. We did the same for

JRME (0.22%), and for every year in our sample. We then calculated similar figures for the

other 27 topics. This allowed us to track the extent to which each topic has been present in

the two journals over the last five decades.

       To help organize our discussion, we further classified our topics into five broad

categories. Recall that Lakatos (1978) suggested that academic disciplines develop through

the competition of research programmes, which can be characterized by their heuristics and

hard cores (and, to a lesser extent, their protective belts). As we noted earlier, this means that

there are at least two ways of tracking the development of an academic discipline. One is to

consider the relative prominence of topics related to research programmes’ heuristics and

hard cores; a second is to look at the substantive content to which the research programmes

have been applied. We therefore categorized each of our topics as being primarily related to a

research programme’s hard core, a research programme’s heuristic, or to substantive domain

content. Because mathematics education research covers a broad range of content, to help

structure our discussion we further divided the domain content topics into three

subcatgeories, relating to ‘mathematical content’, ‘mathematical processes’, and ‘teachers

and learning environments’.

       As discussed above, Lakatos (1978) himself accepted that the distinction between a

programme’s hard core and heuristic is sometimes a matter of convention, so this distinction
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      25
is necessarily subjective. In contrast, we found it relatively straightforward to identify those

topics related to mathematical content, mathematical processes, and teachers and learning

environments. One ambiguity came from the ‘quantitative assessment of reasoning’ topic,

which seemed to be related to both a heuristic (large-scale surveys) and a mathematical

process (reasoning). For the purposes of the discussion and figures that follow, we

categorized this topic as being related to mathematical processes. Similarly, the ‘history and

obituaries’ topic seemed not easily to fit within one of our three domain content

subcategories; in the discussion and figures below we have included it within the teachers

and learning environments section.

       Our discussion of these changes over time is organized in two main sections. First, by

considering the topics categorized as ‘mathematical content’, ‘mathematical processes’ and

‘teachers and learning environments’, we consider how the prominence of different research

foci has changed in the last five decades. Second, we discuss the changing theoretical

perspectives adopted by ESM and JRME authors, by considering topics related to the hard

cores and heuristics of different research programmes.



Changes in Domain Content

       Figures 2, 3 and 4 show the changes in mean topic proportions per year for topics

related to the ‘mathematical content’, ‘mathematical processes’, and ‘teachers and learning

environments’ subcategories respectively. The points on these graphs show the mean

proportion of words from each paper published during the given year that were from the

given topic. In each figure, graphs are ordered according to positive correlations between

year and mean topic proportion (taking the average for each journal), with the highest at the

top. For instance, the correlations between the mean topic proportions and year for the

‘school algebra’ topic, shown at the top of Figure 2, were r = +.49 for ESM and r = +.60 for
                       FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                    26
JRME; whereas the equivalent correlations for the ‘Euclidean geometry’ topic, shown at the

bottom of Figure 2, were r = –.61 for ESM and r = –.44 for JRME.




 Figure 2: The mean proportion of words (excluding stop words) from mathematical content

 topics published by each journal per year. Lines show cubics of best fit. Note that because

these graphs are designed to show within-topic changes over time, they have different y-axis

                                           scales.
                       FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                    27




Figure 3: The mean proportion of words (excluding stop words) from mathematical processes

 topics published by each journal per year. Lines show cubics of best fit. Note that because

these graphs are designed to show within-topic changes over time, they have different y-axis

                                           scales.
                      FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                   28




Figure 4: The mean proportion of words (excluding stop words) from teachers and learning

environments topics published by each journal per year. Lines show cubics of best fit. Note

that because these graphs are designed to show within-topic changes over time, they have

                                  different y-axis scales.
                          FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                       29

        We make several remarks about these figures, first concerning those topics related to

mathematical content. Figure 2 shows that there has been a substantial decline in interest in

Euclidean geometry since the 1970s. This has especially been the case in ESM, which

devoted a great deal of attention to this topic in its early years. However, the fall in

prominence of Euclidean geometry in JRME has also been substantial, but is somewhat

disguised by the scale on the vertical axis (the correlations between year and topic proportion

were r = –.61 and r = –.44 for ESM and JRME respectively). In contrast, both the ‘school

algebra’ and the ‘analysis’ topics have received gradually increasing levels of interest,

whereas the extent to which ‘rational numbers’ and ‘statistics and probability’ have been

discussed has not substantially changed since the 1970s. The ‘addition and subtraction’ topic

shows a peak of interest during the 1980s, but the two journals have apparently devoted less

attention to it in recent years.

        Two of the mathematical processes topics, shown in Figure 3, also show peaks during

the 1980s. There seems to have been somewhat more interest in problem solving during that

decade than there is today, and the same is true for the ‘quantitative assessment of reasoning’

topic, especially in JRME. The ‘proof and argumentation’ topic seems to have steadily

increased in prominence since 2000, but the remaining mathematical processes topics show

no strong trends.

        Several topics related to teaching and learning environments, shown in Figure 4, have

received an increasing level of interest over the past five decades. The most notable is the

increased focus on teacher knowledge and beliefs, which has become steadily more

prominent in both journals since the 1980s, perhaps following Shulman’s (1986) influential

work. The ‘curriculum (especially reform)’ topic has also grown in prominence since 1990;

perhaps unsurprisingly given the NCTM’s involvement in curriculum reform efforts, the bulk
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      30
of this increase has been in JRME. Similarly, in recent years, there appears to have been an

increased focus on designing and evaluating novel assessment methods in both journals.

       There is also a group of topics shown in Figure 4 that have not shown substantial

changes in the extent to which they have been discussed. The ‘multilingual learners’,

‘teaching approaches’, ‘equity’, and ‘history and obituaries’ topics all fall into this group.

The ‘gender’ topic shows a notable peak: ESM published almost no articles with words from

this topic until the late 1970s, a situation that changed substantially during the 1980s. Since

that decade, however, both ESM and JRME appear to have published fewer articles focused

on gender. Finally, discussions of ‘mathematics education around the world’ appear to have

become less of a priority than they once were.

Changes in Research Programmes

       Figure 5 shows changes in prominence over time for those topics categorized as being

related either to a research programme’s hard core or to its heuristic. Again, the graphs are

ordered by the strength of the correlation between year and mean topic proportion. In the

sections that follow, we discuss the three main trends that can be seen in these figures. First,

we consider the ‘social turn’ as identified by Lerman (1996). Second, we identify and discuss

the increased level of theoretical diversity seen in the discipline since the late 1990s. Finally,

we examine the dramatic decline in experimental methods seen since the 1970s.
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     31




Figure 5: The mean proportion of words (excluding stop words) from the eight hard core and

 heuristic topics published by each journal per year. Lines show cubics of best fit. Note that

    because these graphs are designed to show within-topic changes over time, they have

                                    different y-axis scales.



       Before proceeding to discuss these three issues, we briefly note two other trends.

First, the prominence of the ‘formal analyses’ topic has declined significantly since the
                           FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                        32
1970s. In articles published by JRME in the 1970s, between 10% and 20% of words were

from this topic, which relates to formal mathematical analyses of educational theories or

situations. In contrast, very few researchers since the mid-1980s appear to have adopted this

heuristic. The identification of the existence, and subsequent decline, of this ‘formal analysis’

topic – which appears not to be widely commented on in existing historical accounts of the

field’s development – gives some credibility to our earlier suggestion that the inclusive nature

of the topic modeling approach allows us to identify trends that other methods may miss.

Second, we note that the ‘discussion, reflections and essays’ topic has shown a steady decline

in prominence in ESM. In contrast, JRME seems to have maintained a steady – but lower –

rate of publication of words from this topic.



         The Social Turn

         Earlier in the paper we offered a rational reconstruction of the social turn, in which

we suggested that the emergence of the sociocultural research programme in the 1990s was in

reaction to what Lerman (1996) considered to be a degenerating constructivist programme.

On Lerman’s account, if the social turn had become embedded into the mainstream

mathematics education literature at the expense of the constructivist programme, then over

time we would have expected to have seen a gradual increase in prominence of the

‘sociocultural theory’ topic, and a gradual decrease in prominence of the ‘constructivism’

topic.

         This is precisely what our data show. Figure 6 shows the proportions of words from

each topic by year, collapsed across journals. The ‘constructivism’ topic shows a large peak

of interest from the late 1980s to mid-1990s, before declining in prominence from the late

1990s onwards. At around the same time that the field’s interest in constructivism declined,

the proportion of words from the ‘sociocultural theory’ topic began to increase, and is now at
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      33
a roughly similar level to that of the ‘constructivism’ topic at its peak (when it was widely

seen as dominating mathematics education research). The field’s interest in constructivism is

now at the low levels seen in the 1970s. So, although some have questioned the extent to

which the social turn represents a lasting change to the discipline (e.g., Gates & Jorgensen,

2015; Jablonka & Bergsten, 2010), this analysis suggests that it was a significant

development, which has had lasting consequences.




    Figure 6: The social turn. The mean proportion of words from the ‘sociocultural’ and

    ‘constructivist’ topics by year, collapsed across journals. Lines are cubics of best fit.



       Although the sociocultural and constructivism hard cores are distinct, it is notable that

the sociocultural research programme shares a similar heuristic to the social branch of the

constructivist programme, namely a focus on observing classroom interactions. Indeed, this

heuristic change – from individual clinical interviews to observations of interactions – is one

way of characterizing the shift from radical constructivism to social constructivism. Given

this, it is perhaps unsurprising to see that Figure 5 shows a complementary steady increase in

the proportion of words coming from the ‘observations of classroom discourse’ topic since

the 1990s. This trend started at around the time that social constructivism was identified by

Ernest (1991), and has continued through the social turn.
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      34
       Theoretical Diversification

       ‘Sociocultural theory’ is not the only topic from the hard core and heuristic category

that has seen a substantial increase in prominence since 2000. Both the ‘semiotics and

embodied cognition’ and the ‘didactical theories’ topics have shown a similar development

over the same period, particularly in ESM. We might therefore characterize mathematics

education as currently being in a phase of theoretical diversity, where many research

programmes are competing for researchers’ attention.

       Notably, both the ‘semiotics and embodied cognition’ and ‘didactical theories’ topics

cover multiple research programmes. Although both the semiotics and the embodied

cognition research programmes have hard cores that emphasize the importance of non-

cognitive factors to mathematical thinking, they differ in where their emphasis is placed.

Semioticians focus on the roles of signs and symbols in mathematical thought (e.g. Presmeg,

Radford, Roth, & Kadunz, 2016), whereas embodied cognition researchers focus on the role

of the body outside of the brain (e.g., Núñez, Edwards & Matos, 1999). Of course, some

researchers conceptualize certain aspects of bodily movement – gestures or gazes, for

instance – as being signifying acts (e.g., Radford, 2003; Roth, 2012), which provides a

natural link between the two research programmes, and which may explain why ‘semiotics

and embodied cognition’ emerged as one topic. Similarly, at least two research programmes

are contained within our ‘didactical theories’ topic: the ATD of Chevellard (1999) and the

TDS of Brousseau (2006). Therefore, if anything, our analysis underestimates the extent to

which the field has diversified.

       This theoretical diversification has been noted before (e.g., Bikner-Ahsbahs &

Prediger, 2010; Sriraman & English, 2005). But while some researchers have argued that a

diversity of theoretical approaches is valuable for allowing multiple perspectives to be

brought to the same phenomena (e.g., Reid & Knipping, 2010; Simon, 2009), others have
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      35
highlighted dangers. For instance, Dreyfus (2006) complained that mathematics educators

“tend to invent theories, or at least theoretical ideas, at a pace faster than we produce data to

possibly refute our theories” (p. 78).

       Dreyfus’s (2006) argument can be interpreted within Lakatos’s (1978) framework.

Recall that Lakatos suggested that progress in an academic discipline comes about when

research programmes compete for researchers’ attention. One way of assessing a programme

is by considering how it incorporates anomalies into its protective belt. Those programmes

that are progressing will, eventually, attract more attention than those that are degenerating.

Therefore, a degree of programme diversity is a sign of a maturing academic discipline, as

long as these programmes are challenging each other for researchers’ attention by identifying

anomalies and evaluating the resulting modifications to protective belts. Via this process,

researchers can decide whether a particular programme is progressing or degenerating, and

allocate their attention accordingly. As long as this process occurs, some programme

diversity is a strength (cf. Cobb, 2007). However, if, as Dreyfus presumably felt, not all

programmes in mathematics education are regularly challenged in this way, this may lead to a

lack of progress.

       One attempt to deal with the field’s recent theoretical diversity, and concerns about a

lack of anomalies, is to ‘network theories’ (e.g., Bikner-Ahsbahs & Prediger, 2010; Kidron,

Lenfant, Bikner-Ahsbahs, Artigue, & Dreyfus, 2008). Through this process, researchers

attempt to understand, synthesize and perhaps even unify different theoretical approaches.

The aim is to find connections as far as is possible and useful, but not further than that.

Whether complete unification is possible would seem to turn on whether different theoretical

approaches are genuinely different programmes, in the sense that they have incompatible

hard cores; or whether they have similar hard cores that, for historical reasons, are merely

expressed using different terminology. In other words, these networking attempts could be a
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      36
helpful method of determining whether or not different theoretical approaches are genuinely

different research programmes.

       Regardless of whether unification is possible, Lakatos (1978) emphasized that

understanding and engaging with different research programmes is likely to contribute to

identifying and evaluating anomalies. Although it is possible to identify anomalies from

within a research programme, Lakatos wrote that “it is only constructive criticism which,

with the help of rival research programmes, can achieve real success” (p. 92), and that “the

sooner competition starts, the better for progress” (p. 69). Feyerabend (1965, 1993) also

emphasized the advantages that accrue to a field that has multiple competing research

programmes: “The best criticism is provided by those theories which can replace the rivals

they have removed” (p. 227). The social turn provides an example of this: Lerman’s (1996)

critique of social constructivism was heavily informed by his knowledge of sociocultural

theory, the rival programme.



       The Experimental Cliff

       Although the social turn was an important development in the history of mathematics

education research, it is not the most striking trend seen in our data. During the 1970s, the

‘experimental methods’ topic was dominant to an extent not seen in any other topic during

any subsequent period. Indeed, between 30% and 40% of words published in JRME in the

1970s were from this topic. Although this trend is most striking in JRME, a similar pattern

can be seen in ESM. The correlations between the topic’s proportion and year are r = –.86 for

JRME and r = –.63 for ESM. Across both journals, the mean proportion of words in each

paper from the ‘experimental methods’ topic was 22% in the 1970s, 10% in the 1980s, 3% in

the 1990s, 1.7% in the 2000s and 1.5% in the 2010s. We refer to this development as the

‘experimental cliff’.
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      37
        It is notable that there appears to have been no recent upturn in the prominence of this

topic, despite educational policymakers actively trying to encourage, through targeted

funding initiatives, the use of experimental designs in education research. For instance, the

US Department of Education’s Strategic Plan 2002-2007 set an explicit target, stating that

75% of funded projects that address causal questions should use randomized experimental

designs (Department of Education, 2002); and, in 2011, the UK government created a large

new source of educational research funding, the Education Endowment Foundation, that was

required to fund only randomized experimental designs. These official encouragements have

yet to have any effect on the frequency with which experimental designs appear in ESM or

JRME.

        Experimental designs are a subset of quantitative research methods, but while the

‘experimental designs’ topic has substantially decreased in prominence, it is notable that we

did not identify a qualitative research methods topic showing an upwards trend of a similar

magnitude. Our explanation for this observation is that articles which report qualitative

methods tend to be more linguistically diverse than those which report quantitative methods.

Consistent with this suggestion, while we found no unified topic focused on qualitative

methods, we did find topics concerned with classroom discourse, sociocultural theory,

semiotics and embodied cognition, and didactical theories. All of these topics reflect research

programmes that typically (but not exclusively) use qualitative research methods, and all

have shown increases since the 1970s.

        Our discussion of the experimental cliff falls into four main sections. First, we

characterize the research programme most closely identified with the experimental method,

which, following Cobb (2007), we refer to as ‘experimental psychology’. Second, drawing on

contemporary sources, we consider reasons for this trend. Third, we report a bibliometric

analysis of the fate of the experimental psychology programme, and conclude that it is in
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     38
good health, albeit absent from the mathematics education literature. Finally, we draw on

Lakatos’s (1978) account to reflect on the possible implications of this absence of

experimental work for progress in the field.

       Which research programmes in mathematics education are most closely associated

with the experimental method? Different authors have used different terminology. Thompson

(1982), for instance, contrasted constructivism with what he called ‘environmentalism’. He

characterized this latter research programme as being focused on understanding mathematics

learning through the experimental manipulation of the environment, rather than, as a

constructivist would, the consideration of students’ internal mental constructions. Thus,

environmentalists would typically try to see how some manipulation of the environment

affected student or teacher behavior. Cobb (2007) offered a similar characterization, but

referred to the research programme as ‘experimental psychology’, contrasting it with

‘cognitive psychology’, a term he used to describe what we have been calling constructivism.

Clements and Ellerton (1996) used different terminology again, referring to the research

programme as ‘the “scientific” approach’, and Kilpatrick (1992), following Begle (1969),

used the term ‘experimental science’.

       Here we refer to this research programme using the term ‘experimental psychology’,

and characterize it as having the aim of testing or generating theories of human behavior,

typically by manipulating experimental stimuli in ways designed to reveal underlying

psychological processes or associations (e.g., Mook, 1983). These processes could be

cognitive in nature, social in nature, developmental in nature, or simply behavioral. Because

of the large range of psychological processes that can be, and are, studied using experimental

methods, we believe that Cobb’s (2007) use of the term ‘cognitive psychology’ to refer to

constructivism is misleading. Most cognitive psychologists would consider their research

area to be the subset of experimental psychology that focuses on understanding internal
                           FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                        39
cognitive processes, rather than other types of behavior. Support for this assertion comes

from the observation that journals such as the Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology

or the Journal of Experimental Psychology: General publish many cognitive studies (and

from the observation that journals such as Cognition or Cognitive Psychology publish few

constructivist studies).

        If we understand the ‘experimental cliff’ in mathematics education to be a dramatic

move away from the experimental psychology research programme, and towards the

constructivist research programme, what was behind it? Kilpatrick (1992) pointed out that

some researchers at the time felt that mathematics education research was not successfully

influencing educational practice, and suggested that this encouraged the exploration of

alternatives. Clements and Ellerton (1996) attributed the change to two main factors. First,

they argued that doubts had begun to form regarding the validity of null hypothesis

significance testing, a critical part of the experimental method (e.g., Carver, 1978; Menon,

1993).3 Second, and more importantly, they suggested that there was a reaction against the

dominance of the experimental psychology research programme, and a desire for more

diverse approaches to be permitted. Clements and Ellerton went as far as describing

experimental psychology as “a straitjacket” (p. 74) from which mathematics education

research had to emerge.

        A great deal of discussion of this latter point took place in the pages of JRME during

1977-1979. Following a series of letters to JRME that debated the merits of experimental and




        3
          From a contemporary perspective, several of the critiques offered by these authors
seem misplaced. For instance, Clements and Ellerton (1996) were incorrect to state that
“almost any study can be made to show significant results if a sufficiently large sample is
used” (p. 80): this would only be the case for designs where participants are not randomly
allocated into groups. Furthermore, recent research on the relationship between p values and
Bayes factors indicates that it is an exaggeration to say that p values reveal nothing about the
truth of the null hypothesis (e.g. Held, 2010; Sellke, Bayarri, & Berger, 2001).
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      40
non-experimental research (Aiken, 1977; Fennema, 1978; Rappaport, 1977; Scott, 1977;

Shaughnessy, 1978; Steffe, 1978; Wheeler, 1978), Lester and Kerr (1979) wrote a position

statement that explicitly argued for greater methodological diversity. In a series of

recommendations, they suggested that mathematics education doctoral students should be

trained in both experimental methods and non-experimental methods, such as clinical

interviewing and the analysis of verbal protocols required to conduct constructivist research;

that JRME must be willing to publish both experimental and non-experimental research; and

that researchers should openly debate their recommendation for an increase in the diversity of

research programmes accepted in the field.

       The experimental cliff shown in Figure 5 indicates that Lester and Kerr’s (1979) call

for non-experimental work to become more acceptable was remarkably successful, but at the

cost of their call for methodological diversity. Rather than the constructivist research

programme becoming an accepted approach alongside the experimental psychology

programme, as Lester and Kerr were advocating, it replaced it.

       However, we do not believe that the experimental psychology research programme

degenerated to the point where it was abandoned entirely. Our impression is that there is a

thriving research community conducting psychological research on mathematics learning

using experimental methods; indeed, we have contributed to some of this work (e.g., Alcock

et al., 2016). One indication of the current health of the experimental psychology programme,

as it pertains to the learning of mathematics, is the recent foundation of the Journal of

Numerical Cognition, the official journal of the Mathematical Cognition and Learning

Society (Towse, 2015).

       To empirically test our hypothesis that the experimental psychology research

programme has continued to actively investigate mathematics learning, albeit only outside of

mathematics education journals, we conducted an analysis of publications using the Scopus
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      41
bibliographic database. Our goal was to identify trends in the quantity of published research

on mathematics learning from the experimental psychology research programme outside of

the mathematics education literature.

       We searched for all psychology articles that contained “experiment” or

“experimental” in any field, and which contained “learning” and either “mathematical” or

“numerical” in the abstract or title. Because Scopus includes the mathematics education

journals Mathematical Thinking and Learning and the Journal of Mathematical Behavior in

their psychology category, we excluded these from our search.4 We calculated the number of

articles per year that met these criteria, alongside the total number of experimental

psychology articles published each year (psychology articles that included “experiment or

“experimental” in any field, excluding the two mathematics education journals that Scopus

includes in the psychology category). This allowed us to estimate the proportion of

experimental psychology articles published per year that focused on mathematics learning.5

These proportions are plotted in Figure 7 (right axis), alongside the ‘experimental methods’

topic proportions by year, collapsed across both ESM and JRME (left axis). We have plotted

the number of experimental psychology papers on mathematics learning as a percentage of

the total number of experimental psychology papers published, which yields a relatively low

percentage, but in absolute terms the number of papers that met our (fairly restricted) search




       4
          Our formal Scopus search term was ((TITLE-ABS(mathematical OR numerical)
AND TITLE-ABS(learning) AND SUBJAREA(psyc)) AND ALL(experimental OR
experiment) AND (EXCLUDE(EXACTSRCTITLE,"Journal Of Mathematical Behavior")
OR EXCLUDE (EXACTSRCTITLE,"Mathematical Thinking And Learning"))).
        5
          The results reported in this section are robust to minor variations in these search
terms. For instance, a similar pattern is found when searching for articles from sources that
have the words “psychology” or “cognitive” in their title, rather than the psychology subject
area; when removing the “experiment” or “experimental” criterion; or when searching for
articles with “education” rather than “learning” in the title, abstract or keywords etc.
Similarly, consistent results are obtained if Mathematical Thinking and Learning and the
Journal of Mathematical Behavior are included in the psychology category.
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     42
term was relatively large (89 in 2015, compared to the 72 articles published in ESM and

JRME in that year).




 Figure 7: The experimental cliff. Trends over time for (a) the proportion of words from the

‘experimental methods’ topic (collapsed across ESM and JRME), shown on the left axis, and

(b) estimates of the proportion of experimental psychology articles that focus on mathematics

                learning, shown on the right axis. Lines are cubics of best fit.



       Figure 7 indicates that over the same period in which the proportion of experimental

psychology work published in ESM and JRME has been falling, the proportion of

experimental work in general psychology journals that focus on mathematics learning has

been rising. Given this, perhaps the term ‘experimental migration’ might be a more accurate

characterization of what we have called the ‘experimental cliff’. In sum, there appears to be a

great deal of research being conducted on mathematics learning within the experimental

psychology research programme, but little of this work is being published in the two leading

mathematics education research journals. From the perspective of Lakatos’s (1978)

methodology of scientific research programmes, we argue that this situation is highly

suboptimal.
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      43
       As we have discussed, according to Lakatos’s account, competition between

programmes is an effective method of driving scientific progress. This commonly happens

when anomalies are identified that challenge the hard cores of established research

programmes, and the programmes react by incorporating rescue hypotheses into their

protective belts. Evaluating these rescue hypotheses gives one way for researchers to decide

whether a programme is progressing or degenerating. Lakatos (1978) and Feyerabend (1965,

1993) both believed that the most effective challenges to research programmes come from the

perspective of a rival programme. If this belief is correct6, then knowledge of multiple

programmes would be helpful for progression in the field. For instance, the anomalies that

led to the social challenge to constructivism (Carraher, 1988; Lave, 1988; Walkerdine, 1988)

were highly visible in the mathematics education community. Indeed, Carraher’s (1988) work

was presented as a plenary at the annual PME conference in 1988. If this work had remained

isolated from mathematics education researchers, perhaps few would have appreciated the

seriousness of the anomaly posed to the constructivist programme.

       However, assuming that researchers primarily read articles from journals where they

also publish, then publishing work from different research programmes in disjoint sets of

outlets is likely to be a substantial barrier to the development of this knowledge. Specifically,

if knowledge of the experimental psychology research programme is to be developed among

mathematics education researchers, then either some experimental psychology research must

be published in mathematics education journals, or mathematics education researchers must

make a concerted effort to read journals from outside the discipline. Equally, it is hard to see

how experimental psychology researchers will develop knowledge of, say, the sociocultural




       6
          Recall that Kuhn (1962) felt that different research programmes are
incommensurate, so he would have rejected this argument. In contrast, Lakatos (1978) argued
that scientific progress is more than “a matter for mob psychology” (p. 91).
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      44
programme unless research from this tradition is published in the journals that they primarily

read, or unless they widen the range of journals that they typically read.

       What kinds of anomalies might be identified if there were more interactions between

the research programmes? Here we give two indicative examples. Some work in the

experimental psychology research programme has suggested that instructional approaches

termed direct or explicit instruction may be more effective for student attainment than those

relying on guided discovery and collaborative group learning (Gersten et al., 2009; Kirschner,

Sweller, & Clark, 2006; Klahr & Nigam, 2004). On the face of it, this would appear to be an

anomaly for the sociocultural research programme. If teacher-centered instructional

approaches, sometimes involving scripted explanations and an emphasis on mastery of skills

through sustained individual repetitive practice, are successful in building both procedural

and conceptual mathematical knowledge, then how can it be that knowledge is constituted

primarily in social groups rather than in individuals? To be clear, we do not suggest that this

is an insurmountable anomaly for the sociocultural research programme, only that it is one

that should be accommodated, if possible, in its protective belt.

       As an example in the opposite direction, consider recent sociocultural work on micro-

identities. Many sociocultural researchers have noticed that the mathematical identities

students adopt can substantially influence how they learn mathematics (e.g., Martin, 2000;

Sfard & Prusak, 2005). Traditionally, identities have been conceived as being relatively

stable over time. However, recently Wood (2013) illustrated how students’ identities may

change over extremely short periods, in response to relatively minor changes in context. She

used the terms ‘micro-identity’ and ‘macro-identity’ to distinguish between identities that

show moment-to-moment changes and those that are more stable over time. Importantly,

Wood reported a case study of one student who demonstrated at least three different

mathematical micro-identities during the course of a single lesson, and Wood argued that
                          FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                       45
these developing identities influenced the quality of the student’s learning. This observation

poses an interesting challenge to the experimental psychology research programme, where

researchers often assume that the factors that affect behavior within a study are due to

relatively stable individual traits of the participant, to the experimental stimuli, or to

independently and identically distributed random noise. Wood’s study implies that actions

that appear innocuous from the researchers’ perspective may systematically influence

behavior in a way that cannot be assumed to be identical across participants or conditions, an

observation that deserves attention.

        To be clear, the benefits of more between-programme engagement is symmetric. We

are not merely arguing that mathematics education would benefit from some sociocultural,

didactical theory and semiotic researchers being exposed to experimental psychology

research, but also that experimental psychology researchers would benefit from exposure to

the research programmes common in the modern mathematics education literature. If

Lakatos’s (1978) analysis of academic disciplines is correct, then exposure to multiple

research programmes aids the effective competition between programmes, and therefore

progresses the discipline.



                                       Theoretical Remarks

        We conclude the paper by discussing two main issues related to our empirical and

theoretical analysis. First, we clarify our results by considering precisely what our topic

modeling approach allows us to conclude about a research programme’s trajectory. Second,

we discuss whether Feyerabend’s (1981, 1993) criticisms of Lakatos’s (1978) methodology

of scientific research programmes apply to our own work.
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     46
Using Topic Modeling to Identify Programme Shifts

       Our analysis used a topic modeling approach to identify trends in the mathematics

education literature, with a particular focus on the research programmes that researchers have

adopted over the last five decades. The approach works by analyzing the occurrence of words

within papers. Although this method seems to have been successful at identifying topics that

represent research programmes, the presence of a particular word associated with a particular

research programme is not sufficient to conclude that the programme is progressing or

degenerating. The same words are used to denote ideas from the hard core of a programme

both during progressing periods and degenerating periods.

       The implication of this observation is that we cannot directly conclude that a

programme has degenerated in Lakatos’s (1978) sense, only that interest in it has declined

over time. Specifically, although degenerating research programmes will decline in

prominence over time, we cannot conclude that if a research programme has declined in

prominence it must have been degenerating. Programmes may lose (or gain) interest for

reasons unrelated to whether they are degenerating (or progressing). Indeed, we have

suggested that the experimental psychology programme did not degenerate, but rather

migrated. This raises the possibility that a similar phenomenon could account for other trends

observed in our data. For instance, perhaps constructivist mathematics education research

outputs have migrated to different (or new) journals since the social turn. Similarly, perhaps

educational research on Euclidean geometry has migrated since the 1970s. While we have no

reason to believe that these hypotheses are plausible, further research would be required to

test them directly.
                          FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                       47
Feyerabend’s Critique of Lakatos

        Throughout this paper we have framed our analysis of trends in the mathematics

education literature using Lakatos’s (1978) methodology of scientific research programmes.

However, Lakatos’s account is not uncontested. The main critique comes from Feyerabend’s

(1981, 1993) ‘anarchist theory of knowledge’. Feyerabend’s criticisms of Lakatos fall into

two categories. First, he argued that Lakatos’s use of historical rational reconstructions as

evidence was arbitrary in several different ways. He felt Lakatos failed to justify (i) his

decision only to reconstruct scientific episodes from a relatively restricted historical period

(the last 200 years); (ii) his choice of the specific episodes to reconstruct, and (iii) the actual

methods by which he conducted his reconstruction. Second, Feyerabend suggested that there

were no reasons to support Lakatos’s belief that his methodology of scientific research

programmes could show that scientists behaved rationally in their choice of research

programme. He wrote “we can only say that one programme was accepted while the other

receded into the background; we cannot add that the acceptance was rational or that a rational

development took place” (Feyerabend, 1981, p. 220).

        Is our use of Lakatos’s (1978) methodology of scientific research programmes

vulnerable to Feyerabend’s (1981, 1993) criticisms? With respect to the first, our inclusive

approach of analyzing every article published in ESM and JRME since they began publishing

seems to provide a defense against the charge of arbitrariness. Whereas Lakatos chose

specific historical incidents to analyze, we considered every article published by these

journals, widely considered to be the two leading journals in the field. In view of ESM and

JRME’s status, it seems probable that most of the field’s important trends are represented in

the articles they publish. Nevertheless, we are vulnerable to at least one charge of

arbitrariness, that our sample included only journals that publish in English. This important

limitation should be borne in mind when considering our findings.
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      48
       Feyerabend’s (1981, 1993) second criticism does not seem to apply to our use of

Lakatos’s (1978) work. Whereas Lakatos was keen to show that scientists are behaving

rationally when they choose to move from a progressing to a degenerating research

programme, we do not require this assumption. Our goal was not to argue that those who

took part in the social turn were being either rational or irrational when they did so; rather we

have used Lakatos’s methodology of scientific research programmes as a descriptive – not

normative – framework. In that sense, Feyerabend’s main criticisms of Lakatos do not apply

to our analysis. However, our suggestion that mathematics education would benefit from

greater interaction between its research programmes does have a normative flavor. But

Feyerabend advanced a similar argument. He wrote that

       “some of the most important formal properties of a theory are found by contrast, and

       not by analysis. A scientist who wishes to maximize the empirical content of the

       views he holds and who wants to understand them as clearly as he possibly can must

       therefore introduce other views; that is, he must adopt a pluralistic methodology.”

       (p. 21).

In sum, we have argued that mathematics education would benefit from greater interaction

between the experimental psychology and sociocultural research programmes. This is a

proposal that Feyerabend would have wholeheartedly endorsed.




                                          Author Note

This research was partially supported by a Royal Society Worshipful Company of Actuaries

Research Fellowship. We are grateful to Dor Abrahamson, Lara Alcock, Daniel Battey,

Barbara Jaworski, Brendan Larvor, Steve Lerman, John Mason, Juan Pablo Mejia-Ramos,

Dirk Schlimm, Anne Watson and Keith Weber for providing useful feedback on earlier drafts

of this work.
FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                             49
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     50
                                          References

Adi, H., Karplus, R., & Lawson, A. E. (1980). Conditional logic abilities on the four-card

       problem: Assessment of behavioral and reasoning performances. Educational Studies

       in Mathematics, 11(4), 479-496. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00231218

Aiken, L. R. (1977). Letter to the Editor. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,

       8(3), 240. https://doi.org/10.2307/748529

Alcock, L., Ansari, D., Batchelor, S., Bisson, M.-J., De Smedt, B., Gilmore, C., Göbel, S. M.,

       Hannula-Sormunen, M., Hodgen, J., Inglis, M., Jones, I., Mazzocco, M., McNeil, N.,

       Schneider, M., Simms, V., & Weber, K. (2016). Challenges in mathematical

       cognition: A collaboratively-derived research agenda. Journal of Numerical

       Cognition, 2(1), 20-41. https://doi.org/10.5964/jnc.v2i1.10

Banerjee, R., & Subramaniam, K. (2012). Evolution of a teaching approach for beginning

       algebra. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 80(3), 351-367.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-011-9353-y

Barbe, J., Bosch, M., Espinoza, L., & Gascon, J. (2005). Didactic restrictions on the teacher's

       practice: The case of limits of functions in Spanish high schools. Educational Studies

       in Mathematics, 59(1-3), 235-268. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-005-5889-z

Baroody, A. (1987). The development of counting strategies for single-digit addition. Journal

       for Research in Mathematics Education, 18(2), 141-157.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/749248

Battista, M. (1999). Fifth graders' enumeration of cubes in 3D arrays: Conceptual progress in

       an inquiry-based classroom. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 30(4),

       417-448. https://doi.org/10.2307/749708
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     51
Begle, E. G. (1969). The role of research in the improvement of mathematics education.

       Educational Studies in Mathematics, 2(2-3), 232-244.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00303460

Behr, M., & Eastman, P. (1975). Interactions between structure-of-intellect factors and two

       methods of presenting concepts of modulus seven arithmetic: A follow-up and

       refinement study. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 6(3), 150-157.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/748756

Bikner-Ahsbahs, A. & Prediger, S. (2010). Networking of theories - An approach for

       exploiting the diversity of theoretical approaches. In B. Sriraman & L. English (Eds.),

       Theories of Mathematics Education (pp. 483-506). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00742-2_46

Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet allocation. The Journal of

       Machine Learning Research, 3, 993-1022.

Boero, P., & Szendrei, J. R. (1998). Research and results in mathematics education: Some

       contradictory aspects. In A. Sierpinska & J. Kilpatrick (Eds.), Mathematics education

       as a research domain: A search for identity (pp. 197-212). Dordrecht, Netherlands:

       Kluwer.

Brookhart, S. M., Andolina, M., Zuza, M., & Furman, R. (2004). Minute math: An action

       research study of student self-assessment. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 57(2),

       213-227. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:EDUC.0000049293.55249.d4

Brousseau, G. (2006). Theory of didactical situations in mathematics: Didactique des

       mathématiques, 1970–1990. Dordrecht: Springer.

Bruner, J. (1996). Celebrating diversity: Piaget and Vygotsky. Presented at the ‘Vygotsky-

       Piaget Conference’ at the Second Congress of Sociocultural Research, Geneva.
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     52
Bush, W. (1986). Preservice teachers' sources of decisions in teaching secondary

       mathematics. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 17(1), 21-30.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/749316

Carver, R. P. (1978). The case against statistical significance testing. Harvard Educational

       Review, 48(3), 378-399. https://doi.org/10.17763/haer.48.3.t490261645281841

Cattell, R. B. (1966). The scree test for the number of factors. Multivariate Behavioral

       Research, 1(2), 245-276. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327906mbr0102_10

Chassapis, D. (2002). Social groups in mathematics education research: An investigation into

       mathematics education-related research articles published from 1971 to 2000. In P.

       Valero & O. Skovsmose (Eds.) Proceedings of the 3nd International Mathematics

       Education and Society Conference (pp. 229-237). Copenhagen: Centre for Research

       in Learning Mathematics.

Chevallard, Y. (1999). Pratiques enseignantes en théorie anthropologique. Recherches en

       Didactique des Mathématiques, 19(2), 221–266.

Clements, M. A., & Ellerton, N. F. (1996). Mathematics education research: Past, present

       and future. Bangkok, Thailand: UNESCO.

Cobb, P. (2007). Putting philosophy to work: Coping with multiple theoretical perspectives.

       In F. K. Lester Jr. (Ed.), Second Handbook of Research on Mathematics Teaching and

       Learning (pp. 3-38). Charlotte, NC: Information Age.

Cobb, P., Yackel, E., & Wood, T. (1988). Curriculum and teacher development:

       Psychological and anthropological perspectives. In E. Fennema, T. P. Carpenter, & S.

       J. Lamon (Eds.), Integrating research on teaching and learning mathematics (pp. 83-

       120). Madison, WI: Wisconsin Centre for Educational Research.
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     53
Cobb, P., Yackel, E., & Wood, T. (1992). A constructivist alternative to the representational

       view of mind in mathematics education. Journal for Research in Mathematics

       Education, 23(1), 2-33. https://doi.org/10.2307/749161

Coxeter, H. S. M. (1971). Inversive geometry. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 3(3-4),

       310-321. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00302300

Davis, P. J., & Hersh, R. (1980). The mathematical experience. Harmondsworth, UK:

       Penguin.

Davis, R. B. (1990). Discovery learning and constructivism. In R. B. Davis, C. A. Maher, &

       N. Noddings (Eds.), Constructivist views on the teaching and learning of mathematics

       (pp. 93-106). Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Dehaene, S. (1997). The number sense: How the mind creates mathematics. New York, NY:

       Oxford University Press.

Department of Education (2002). US Department of Education Strategic Plan 2002-2007.

       Retrieved from https://www2.ed.gov/about/reports/strat/plan2002-07/plan.doc (5th

       March 2017).

Dienes, Z. (2008). Understanding psychology as a science: An introduction to scientific and

       statistical inference. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Dreyfus, T. (2006). Linking theories in mathematics education. In A. Simpson (Ed.)

       Retirement as process and concept: A festschrift for Eddie Gray and David Tall (pp.

       77-82). Durham, UK: Durham University.

Ernest, P. (1991). The philosophy of mathematics education. London: Routledge Falmer.

Ethington, C. (1992). Gender differences in a psychological model of mathematics

       achievement. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 23(2), 166-181.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/749499
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     54
Fennema, E. (1978). Letter to the Editor. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,

       9(5), 398. https://doi.org/10.2307/748780

Feyerabend, P. (1981). Philosophical papers volume 2: Problems of empiricism. Cambridge:

       Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139171588

Feyerabend, P. (1993). Against method: Outline of an anarchist theory of knowledge (3rd

       edn) (1st edn 1975). London: Verso.

Feyerabend, P. K. (1965). Reply to criticism. In R. S. Cohen and M. Wartofsky (Eds.),

       Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science (vol. 2), pp. 223-61. Dordrecht: Reidel.

Frejd, P. (2013). Modes of modelling assessment—a literature review. Educational Studies in

       Mathematics, 84(3), 413-438. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-013-9491-5

Gallistel, C. R., & Gelman, R. (1992). Preverbal and verbal counting and computation.

       Cognition, 44(1-2), 43-74. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(92)90050-R

Gates, P. & Jorgensen (Zevenbergen), R. (2015). Mapping the field and documenting the

       contribution. In P. Gates & R. Jorgensen (Zevenbergen) (Eds), Shifts in the field of

       mathematics education, (pp. 1-14). London, UK: Springer.

Gebuis, T., Cohen Kadosh, R., & Gevers, W. (2016). Sensory-integration system rather than

       approximate number system underlies numerosity processing: A critical review. Acta

       Psychologica, 171, 17-35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2016.09.003

Gersten, R., Chard, D. J., Jayanthi, M., Baker, S. K., Morphy, P., & Flojo, J. (2009).

       Mathematics instruction for students with learning disabilities: A meta-analysis of

       instructional components. Review of Educational Research, 79(3), 1202-1242.

       https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654309334431

Gilbert, J. K., & Swift, D. J. (1985). Towards a Lakatosian analysis of the Piagetian and

       alternative conceptions research programs. Science Education, 69(5), 681-696.

       https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sce.3730690510
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     55
Gillies, D. (2007). Lessons from the history and philosophy of science regarding the

       Research Assessement Exercise. Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement, 61, 37-73.

       https://doi.org/10.1017/S1358246107000148

Ginsburg, H. (1981). The clinical interview in psychological research on mathematical

       thinking: Aims, rationales, techniques. For the Learning of Mathematics, 1(3), 4-11.

Glasersfeld, E, von. (1990). An exposition of constructivism: Why some like it radical. In R.

       B. Davis, C. A. Maher, & N. Noddings (Eds.), Constructivist views on the teaching

       and learning of mathematics (JRME, Monograph no. 4, pp. 19-30). Reston, VA:

       National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

Glasersfeld, E, von. (1991). Knowing without metaphysics: Aspects of the radical

       constructivist position. In F. Steier (Ed.), Research and reflexivity (pp. 12–29).

       London, UK: Sage.

Goos, M., Galbraith, P., & Renshaw, P. (2002). Socially mediated metacognition: Creating

       collaborative zones of proximal development in small group problem solving.

       Educational Studies in Mathematics, 49(2), 193-223.

       https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1016209010120

Greiffenhagen, C., & Sharrock, W. (2008). School mathematics and its everyday other?

       Revisiting Lave's 'Cognition in Practice'. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 69(1),

       1-21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-008-9115-7

Grimmer, J., & Stewart, B. M. (2013). Text as data: The promise and pitfalls of automatic

       content analysis methods for political texts. Political Analysis, 21(3), 267–297.

       https://doi.org/10.1093/pan/mps028

Gutiérrez, R. (2013). The sociopolitical turn in mathematics education. Journal for Research

       in Mathematics Education, 44(1), 37-68.

       https://doi.org/10.5951/jresematheduc.44.1.0037
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     56
Hanna, G. & Sidoli, N. (2002). The story of ESM. Educational Studies in Mathematics,

       50(2), 123-156. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1021162617070

Held, L. (2010). A nomogram for P values. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 10, 21.

       https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-10-21

Inglis, M. (2015). Review of "APOS Theory: A framework for research and curriculum

       development in mathematics education, Arnon et al. (2014)." International Journal of

       Research in Undergraduate Mathematics Education, 1(3), 413-417.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/s40753-015-0015-9

Jablonka, E. & Bergsten, C. (2010). Commentary on 'Theories of mathematics education: Is

       plurality a problem?'. In B. Sriraman & L. English (Eds.), Theories of mathematics

       education: Seeking new frontiers (pp. 111-117). Dordrecht: Springer.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00742-2_12

Jacobi, C., van Atteveldt, W., & Welbers, K. (2016). Quantitative analysis of large amounts

       of journalistic texts using topic modelling. Digital Journalism, 4(1), 89-106.

       https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2015.1093271

Jones, G. A., Langrall, C. W., Thornton, C. A., & Mogill, A. T. (1997). A framework for

       assessing and nurturing young children's thinking in probability. Educational Studies

       in Mathematics, 32(2), 101-125. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1002981520728

Kidron, I., Lenfant, A., Bikner-Ahsbahs, A., Artigue, M. & Dreyfus, T. (2008). Toward

       networking three theoretical approaches: The case of social interactions. ZDM

       Mathematics Education, 40(2), 247-264. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11858-008-0079-y

Kieran, C. (1994). Doing and seeing things differently: A 25-year retrospective of

       mathematics education research on learning. Journal for Research in Mathematics

       Education, 25(6), 583-607. https://doi.org/10.2307/749574
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     57
Kilpatrick, J. (1992). A history of research in mathematics education. In D. A. Grouws (Ed.),

       Handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 3-38). New York:

       MacMillan.

Kilpatrick, J. (2014). History of research in mathematics education. In S. Lerman (Ed.),

       Encyclopedia of mathematics education (pp. 267-272). Springer: Dordrecht.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-4978-8_71

Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during

       instruction does not work: An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery,

       problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching. Educational

       Psychologist, 41(2), 75-86. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep4102_1

Kitcher, P. (1983). The nature of mathematical knowledge. Oxford, UK: Oxford University

       Press.

Klahr, D., & Nigam, M. (2004). The equivalence of learning paths in early science

       instruction: Effects of direct instruction and discovery learning. Psychological

       Science, 15(10), 661-667. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00737.x

Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago

       Press.

Laborde, C., & Perrin-Glorian, M. J. (2005). Introduction teaching situations as object of

       research: Empirical studies within theoretical perspectives. Educational Studies in

       Mathematics, 59(1-3), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-005-5761-1

Lai, K. H., & Loo, S. P. (1992). State-of-the-art review of research in mathematics education

       in Malaysia. Penang: Southeast Asian Research Review and Advisory Group.

Lakatos, I. (1970). History of science and its rational reconstructions. PSA: Proceedings of

       the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association, 1970, 91-136.

       https://doi.org/10.1086/psaprocbienmeetp.1970.495757
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     58
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and refutations. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

       https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139171472

Lakatos, I. (1978). The methodology of scientific research programmes: Philosophical

       papers Volume 1. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

       https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511621123

Larvor, B. (1998). Lakatos: An Introduction. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.

Lave, J. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind, mathematics and culture in everyday life.

       Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

       https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511609268

Leatham, K. R. (2015). Observations on citation practices in mathematics education research.

       Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 46(3), 253-269.

       https://doi.org/10.5951/jresematheduc.46.3.0253

Leikin, R., & Zaslavsky, O. (1997). Facilitating student interactions in mathematics in a

       cooperative learning setting. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 28(3),

       331-354. https://doi.org/10.2307/749784

Lerman, S. (1996). Intersubjectivity in mathematics learning: A challenge to the radical

       constructivist paradigm? Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27(2), 133-

       150. https://doi.org/10.2307/749597

Lerman, S. (2000). The social turn in mathematics education research. In J. Boaler (Ed.),

       Multiple perspectives on mathematics teaching and learning (pp. 19-44). Westport,

       CT: Ablex.

Lerman, S., Xu, G., & Tsatsaroni, A. (2002). Developing theories of mathematics education

       research: The ESM story. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 51(1-2), 23-40.

       https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022412318413
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     59
Lester, F. K., & Kerr, D. R. (1979). Some ideas about research methodologies in mathematics

       education. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 10(3), 228-232.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/748813

Linton, C. (2004). From Eudoxus to Einstein: A history of mathematical astronomy.

       Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Lubienski, S. T. & Bowen, A. (2000). Who's counting? A survey of mathematics education

       research 1982-1998. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 31(5), 626-633.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/749890

Martin, D. B. (2000). Mathematics success and failure among African-American youth: The

       roles of sociohistorical context, community forces, school influence, and individual

       agency. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

McCallum, A. K. (2002). MALLET: MAchine Learning for LanguagE Toolkit. Retrieved

       from http://mallet.cs.umass.edu

Menon, R. (1993). Statistical significance testing should be discontinued in mathematics

       education research. Mathematics Education Research Journal, 5(1), 4-18.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03217248

Miller, L. D. (1992). Teacher benefits from using impromptu writing prompts in algebra

       classes. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 23(4), 329-340.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/749309

Mook, D. G. (1983). In defense of external invalidity. American Psychologist, 38(4), 379-

       387. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.38.4.379

Morgan, C. (2014). Social theory in mathematics education: Guest editorial. Educational

       Studies in Mathematics, 87(2), 123-128. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-014-9572-0

Moschkovich, J. (2007). Using two languages when learning mathematics. Educational

       Studies in Mathematics, 64(2), 121-144. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-005-9005-1
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     60
Mousley, J. A. (2015). Knowledge construction: Individual or social? In P. Gates & R.

       Jorgensen (Zevenbergen) (Eds.). Shifts in the field of mathematics education, (pp.

       151-170). London, UK: Springer.

Nivens, R. A., & Otten, S. (2017). Assessing Journal Quality in Mathematics Education.

       Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 48(4), 348-368.

       https://dx.doi.org/10.5951/jresematheduc.48.4.0348

Noddings, N. (1990). Constructivism in mathematics education. In R. B. Davis, C. A. Maher,

       & N. Noddings (Eds.), Constructivist views on the teaching and learning of

       mathematics (JRME, Monograph no. 4, pp. 7-18). Reston, VA: National Council of

       Teachers of Mathematics.

Noelting, G. (1980). The development of proportional reasoning and the ratio concept Part

       I—Differentiation of stages. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 11(2), 217-253.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00304357

Núñez, R. E., Edwards, L., D., & Matos, J. F. (1999). Embodied cognition as grounding for

       situatedness and context in mathematics education. Educational Studies in

       Mathematics, 39(1-3), 45-65. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1003759711966

Pais, A. (2015). Symbolising the real of mathematics education. Educational Studies in

       Mathematics, 89(3), 375-391. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-015-9602-6

Pais, A., & Valero, P. (2012). Researching research: mathematics education in the political.

       Educational Studies in Mathematics, 80(1-2), 9-24. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-

       012-9399-5

Pais, A., & Valero, P. (2014). Whither social theory? Educational Studies in Mathematics,

       87(2), 241-248. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-014-9573-z

Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. New York: International

       Universities Press. https://doi.org/10.1037/11494-000
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      61
Popper, K. (1959). The logic of scientific discovery. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.

Post, T., Medhanie, A., Harwell, M., Norman, K., Dupuis, D., Muchlinski, T., … Monson, D.

       (2010). The impact of prior mathematics achievement on the relationship between

       high school mathematics curricula and postsecondary mathematics performance,

       course-taking, and persistence. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,

       41(3), 274-308.

Presmeg, N., Radford, L., Roth, W.-M., & Kadunz, G. (2016). Semiotics in theory and

       practice in mathematics education. In N. Presmeg, L. Radford, W.-M. Roth, & G.

       Kadunz (Eds.). Semiotics in mathematics education (pp. 5-29). London, UK:

       Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-31370-2

Radford, L. (2003). Gestures, speech, and the sprouting of signs: A semiotic-cultural

       approach to students' types of generalization. Mathematical Thinking and Learning,

       5(1), 37-70. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327833MTL0501_02

Rappaport, D. (1977). Letter to the Editor. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,

       8(2), 160-161. https://doi.org/10.2307/748550

Reid, D. & Knipping, C. (2010). Proof in mathematics education: Research, learning and

       teaching. Rotterdam, Netherlands: Sense Publishers.

Roberts, D. (2001). Letter to the editor. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,

       32(2), 227-227. https://doi.org/10.2307/749675

Roh, K. H. (2010). An empirical study of students' understanding of a logical structure in the

       definition of limit via the ε-strip activity. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 73(3),

       263-279. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-009-9210-4

Saenz-Ludlow, A. (1994). Michael's fraction schemes. Journal for Research in Mathematics

       Education, 25(1), 50-85. https://doi.org/10.2307/749292
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      62
Sakonidis, C. (2015). Tracing the advances in the field of mathematics education. In P. Gates

       & R. Jorgensen (Zevenbergen) (Eds.). Shifts in the field of mathematics education,

       (pp. 59-74). London, UK: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-287-179-4_5

Schoenfeld, A. H. (2016). Research in mathematics education. Review of Research in

       Education, 40(1), 497-528. https://doi.org/10.3102/0091732X16658650

Scott, D. E. (1977). Letter to the Editor. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,

       8(3), 239. https://doi.org/10.2307/748529

Sellke, T., Bayarri, M. J., & Berger, J. O. (2001). Calibration of p values for testing precise

       null hypotheses. The American Statistician, 55(1), 62-71.

       https://doi.org/10.1198/000313001300339950

Sfard, A., & Prusak, A. (2005). Telling identities: in search of an analytic tool for

       investigating learning as a culturally shaped activity. Educational Researcher, 34(4),

       14-22. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X034004014

Shaughnessy, J. M. (1978). Letter to the Editor. Journal for Research in Mathematics

       Education, 9(5), 399-400. https://doi.org/10.2307/748780

Shulman, L. S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. Educational

       Researcher, 15(2), 4-14. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X015002004

Sierpinska, A., & Kilpatrick, J. (Eds.). (1998). Mathematics education as a research domain:

       A search for identity: An ICMI study. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer.

Silver, E. (1981). Recall of mathematical problem information: Solving related problems.

       Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 12(1), 54-64.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/748658

Silver, E. (2003). Attention deficit disorder? Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,

       34(1), 2-3.
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     63
Simon, M. A. (2009). Amidst multiple theories of learning in mathematics education. Journal

       for Research in Mathematics Education, 40(5), 477-490.

Sriraman, B., & English, L. (2005). Theories of mathematics education: A global survey of

       theoretical frameworks/trends in mathematics education research. ZDM Mathematics

       Education, 37(6), 450-456. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02655853

Steffe, L. P. (1978). Letter to the Editor. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,

       9(5), 398-399. https://doi.org/10.2307/748780

Steffe, L. P., & Thompson, P. W. (2000). Interaction or intersubjectivity? A reply to Lerman.

       Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 31(2), 191-209.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/749751

Steffe, L. P., & Ulrich, C. (2014). Constructivist teaching experiment. In S. Lerman (Ed.),

       Encylopedia of mathematics education (pp. 102-109). London, UK: Springer.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-4978-8_32

Steffe, L., & Kieren, T. (1994). Radical constructivism and mathematics education. Journal

       for Research in Mathematics Education, 25(6), 711-733.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/749582

Steiner, H. G., & Kaufman, B. A. (1969). Checker games in operational systems as media for

       an inductive approach to teaching algebra. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 1(4),

       445-483. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02396318

Swanson, D., Schwartz, R., Ginsburg, H., & Kossan, N. (1981). The clinical interview:

       Validity, reliability and diagnosis. For the Learning of Mathematics, 2(2), 31-38.

Taber, K. S. (2007). Classroom-based research and evidence-based practice: An

       introduction. London, UK: Sage. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781849208734
                        FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                     64
Tall, D., & Vinner, S. (1981). Concept image and concept definition in mathematics with

       particular reference to limits and continuity. Educational Studies in Mathematics,

       12(2), 151-169. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00305619

Thompson, P. W. (1982). Were lions to speak, we wouldn't understand. Journal of

       Mathematical Behavior, 3(2), 147-165.

Thompson, P. W. (2014). Constructivism in mathematics education. In S. Lerman (Ed.)

       Encylopedia of Mathematics Education (pp. 96-102). Springer: London, UK.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-4978-8_31

Toerner, G., & Arzarello, F. (2012). Grading mathematics education research journals. EMS

       Newsletter, 86, 52-54.

Toumasis, C. (1990). The epos of Euclidean geometry in Greek secondary education (1836–

       1985): Pressure for change and resistance. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 21(6),

       491-508. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00315941

Towse, J. (2015). Finding a voice for numerical cognition. Journal of Numerical Cognition,

       1(1), 1-6. https://doi.org/10.5964/jnc.v1i1.16

Tsatsaroni, A., Lerman, S., & Xu, G.-R. (2003). A sociological description of changes in the

       intellectual field of mathematics education research: Implications for the identities of

       academics. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational

       Research Association (Chicago, IL). Available at https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED482512

       [Retrieved March 27th 2017.]

Vamvakoussi, X., Van Dooren, W., & Verschaffel, L. (2013). Brief Report. Educated adults

       are still affected by intuitions about the effect of arithmetical operations: Evidence

       from a reaction-time study. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 82(2), 323-330.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-012-9432-8

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                         FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                      65
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Wagner, D. (2015). A speech act in mathematics education – The social turn. In P. Gates &

       R. Jorgensen (Zevenbergen) (Eds.), Shifts in the field of mathematics education, (pp.

       75-90). London, UK: Springer.

Walkerdine, V. (1988). The mastery of reason. London, UK: Routledge.

Walkerdine, V. (1989). Counting girls out. London, UK: Virago.

Warren, E., & English, L. (1995). Facility with plane shapes: A multifaceted skill.

       Educational Studies in Mathematics, 28(4), 365-383.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01274079

Weber, K. (2008). How mathematicians determine if an argument is a valid proof. Journal

       for Research in Mathematics Education, 39(4), 431-459.

Wheeler, D. (1978). Letter to the Editor. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,

       9(3), 240. https://doi.org/10.2307/749003

Williams, S. (2007). The story's the thing. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,

       38(4), 342-343.

Williams, S. R., & Leatham, K. R. (2017). Journal Quality in Mathematics Education.

       Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 48(4), 369-396.

       https://dx.doi.org/10.5951/jresematheduc.48.4.0369

Wilson, B. J. (1978). Change in mathematics education since the late 1950's—Ideas and

       realization: West Indies. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 9(3), 355-379.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00241037

Wilson, J. W. (1994). Guest editorial. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 25(1),

       2-3.
                       FIVE DECADES OF MATHEMATICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
                                                                    66
Wittmann, E. (1973). The concept of grouping in Jean Piaget's psychology—Formalization

       and applications. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 5(2), 125-146.

       https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01421021

Wood, M. B. (2013). Mathematical micro-identities: Moment-to-moment positioning and

       learning in a fourth-grade classroom. Journal for Research in Mathematics

       Education, 44(5), 775-808. https://doi.org/10.5951/jresematheduc.44.5.0775

Yackel, E., & Cobb, P. (1996). Sociomathematical norms, argumentation, and autonomy in

       mathematics. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 27(4), 458-477.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/749877

Yoon, C., Thomas, M. O., & Dreyfus, T. (2011). Grounded blends and mathematical gesture

       spaces: developing mathematical understandings via gestures. Educational Studies in

       Mathematics, 78(3), 371-393. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10649-011-9329-y
